                                                                            ARTICLES



Profile Evidence, Fairness, and the Risks
of Mistaken Convictions*

Marcello Di Bello and Collin O’Neil
Many oppose the use of profile evidence against defendants at trial, even when the
statistical correlations are reliable and the jury is free from prejudice. The liter-
ature has struggled to justify this opposition. We argue that admitting profile ev-
idence is objectionable because it violates what we call “equal protection”—that
is, a right of innocent defendants not to be exposed to higher ex ante risks of mis-
taken conviction compared to other innocent defendants facing similar charges.
We also show why admitting other forms of evidence, such as eyewitness, trace,
and motive evidence, does not violate equal protection.




I. INTRODUCTION

In May 14, 1992 a package containing raw opium was delivered to an apartment
rented by Neng Vue and Lee Vue, two brothers of Hmong ancestry who
lived in the city of Minneapolis. The police monitored the delivery, and the
brothers were arrested and brought to trial on opium trafficking charges.
To bolster the case against them, the prosecution called an expert witness
to the stand who testified that 95 percent of the opium smuggling cases in

     * For valuable comments and discussions, we are grateful to Sean Aas, Ronald Allen,
Lalaie Ameeriar, Nicolas Delon, Didier Fassin, Camil Golub, Bernard Harcourt, Sari Kisi-
levsky, Robert MacDougall, Jennifer Morton, Marsha O’Neil, Duncan Purves, Regina Rini,
Umrao Sethi, Seana Valentine Shiffrin, George Smith, Jacob Sparks, Travis Timmerman,
Massimiliano Tomba, David Wasserman, and participants in the NYC Early Career Ethicists
Workshop, the XII Conference of the Italian Society for Analytic Philosophy, and the CUNY
Faculty Fellowship Publication Program, as well as to audiences at the University of Lausanne,
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Milan Polytechnic University, and University of
Nevada, Las Vegas. We also thank two anonymous reviewers and several associate editors at
Ethics for very helpful suggestions. Both authors contributed equally to this article.


Ethics 130 ( January 2020): 147–178
© 2020 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0014-1704/2020/13002-0001$10.00


                                            147
148       Ethics     Q
the Minneapolis area involved people of Hmong ancestry.1 When paired
with the fact that the Hmong compose only 6 percent of the population
in the area, the 95 percent estimate yields the following correlation:

      Ethnicity: In the Minneapolis area, someone who is of Hmong ances-
      try is 297 times more likely to be trafficking drugs as compared to
      someone who is not of Hmong ancestry.2

      The brothers were convicted of opium smuggling, and while the cor-
relation between ethnicity and drug trafficking would obviously not have
been enough on its own to convict them, it might well have been the tip-
ping point for the jury. The convictions were reversed on appeal, on the
grounds that the jury had been improperly invited to “put the Vues’ racial
and cultural background into the balance in determining their guilt.”3
Setting aside the legal details of the court’s argument, there is surely some-
thing intuitively troubling about admitting evidence like Ethnicity at trial.
Allowing such evidence to be used against a defendant would seem to
wrong the defendant, even when it plays only a supplementary role.
      The use of statistics about ethnicity, especially statistics about a disad-
vantaged and stigmatized ethnicity, may raise special concerns.4 But there
is also intuitive resistance to admitting the following correlations as evi-
dence against defendants:

      Prior Burglary: Someone who has previously been convicted of bur-
      glary is 125 times more likely to commit burglary than someone in
      the general population.5

      Bad Environment: 20 percent of males brought up in broken homes,
      addicted to drugs, and unemployed go on to commit serious acts of

      1. U.S. v. Vue, 13 F.3d 1206 (8th Circuit, 1994).
      2. If the Hmong commit 95 percent of the opium smuggling crimes and are 6 percent
of the population in the area, the remaining 94 percent of the population must commit
only 5 percent of such crimes. That is, (.95/.06)/(.05/.94) 5 297.
      3. U.S. v. Vue, 1213. Many appellate courts have held that evidence like Ethnicity is in-
admissible, e.g., U.S. v. Cabrera, 222 F.3d 590 (9th Circuit, 2000).
      4. Annabelle Lever usefully distinguishes two approaches to the issue of racial or eth-
nic profiling: a statistical discrimination approach which treats racial profiling as one in-
stance of a more general issue, and a social construction approach which is primarily con-
cerned with the specific ways in which racial profiling contributes to racial oppression. We
are pursuing the former approach here. See Annabelle Lever, “Racial Profiling and the Po-
litical Philosophy of Race,” in The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Race, ed. Naomi Zack
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017), 425–35.
      5. See Michael Redmayne, “The Relevance of Bad Character,” Cambridge Law Journal
61 (2002): 684–714. Rule 403 of the US Federal Rules of Evidence forbids, with some ex-
ceptions, admitting prior crime evidence. Defendants fit the profile in Prior Burglar be-
cause of a choice, unlike the profiles in Ethnicity and Bad Environment. On this, see note 49.
                                          Di Bello and O’Neil        Profile Evidence 149
      violence, while only 0.1 percent of people in the general population
      commit such crimes.6

Ethnicity, Prior Burglary, and Bad Environment are all examples of what we
shall call “profile evidence.” In its incriminating form, profile evidence
expresses a positive, nonaccidental statistical correlation between bearing
a certain property and committing a type of crime. When the correlation
is reliable and the defendant has the property, this evidence is probative of
guilt—that is, its addition to the body of evidence would increase, some-
times even substantially, the probability that the fact finders should assign
to the defendant’s guilt.7
       There is a presumption in favor of admitting probative evidence,
since normally this would make the fact finders more likely to reach accu-
rate verdicts, and accuracy is obviously an important legal value. Of course,
evidence that ought to enhance accuracy could instead detract from it if
fact finders do not respond appropriately. They might tend to give profile
evidence more weight than it deserves, and they might even be persuaded
by profile evidence to convict defendants for who they are rather than for
what they did. Nevertheless, while such concerns may underlie some of
the resistance to the use of profile evidence at trial, they cannot account
for all of it. Even on the assumption that fact finders would respond ratio-
nally to Ethnicity, Prior Burglary, and Bad Environment, defendants would
still seem to have grounds for complaint if such evidence were used against
them.8
       It is not obvious what those grounds could be. The objection to ad-
mitting profile evidence cannot be that such evidence is statistical, because

      6. For a similar example, see R. A. Duff, “Dangerousness and Citizenship,” in Funda-
mentals of Sentencing Theory, ed. Andrew Ashworth and Martin Wasik (Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1998), 141–64, 156.
      7. For example, Bad Environment evidence can make a significant difference to the
probability of the defendant’s guilt. Suppose that other evidence singles out two individu-
als, each initially 50 percent likely to be guilty, where one matches profile BE and the other
does not. If someone matching profile BE is 200 times more likely to engage in violence
than someone in the general population, the 200 : 1 ratio can be construed to yield a guilt
probability of 200/(200 1 1), or roughly 99.5 percent.
      8. The possibility of forming a belief based on profile evidence without any epistemic
irrationality, in contexts like this one, has recently been challenged on moral encroach-
ment grounds; see, e.g., Rima Basu, “The Specter of Normative Conflict: Does Fairness Re-
quire Inaccuracy?,” in An Introduction to Implicit Bias: Knowledge, Justice, and the Social Mind,
ed. Erin Beeghly and Alex Madva (New York: Routledge, forthcoming); Renée Jorgensen
Bolinger, “The Rational Impermissibility of Accepting (Some) Racial Generalizations,”
Synthese (forthcoming); and Sarah Moss, “IX—Moral Encroachment,” Proceedings of the Ar-
istotelian Society 118 (2018): 177–205. For a critical examination of moral encroachment,
see Georgi Gardiner, “Evidentialism and Moral Encroachment,” in Believing in Accordance
with the Evidence: New Essays on Evidentialism, ed. Kevin McCain (Cham: Springer, 2018), 169–
95. Nothing in our argument will turn on the truth or falsehood of moral encroachment.
150       Ethics       January 2020
admitting other forms of statistical evidence is unobjectionable. If DNA is
discovered at a crime scene and it matches the defendant’s DNA, it would
be appropriate to admit statistics about the low frequency of the defen-
dant’s genetic profile within the general population. Nor can the objec-
tion be that profile evidence cites a generalization about what people like
the defendant are more likely to do. Motive evidence, such as the fact
that the defendant had recently fought with the victim, is routinely
admitted at trial, even though it implicitly invites fact finders to rely on gen-
eralizations like “people who engaged in a heated argument with some-
one are more likely to kill that person as compared to other people.” So
what is special about profile evidence?
      Some scholars have argued that the problem with profile evidence is
that its admissibility at trial may compromise the deterrent effect of pun-
ishment.9 Other scholars have argued that admitting profile evidence
is inconsistent with respecting the autonomy or individuality of defen-
dants.10 In Section II, we will explain why these accounts fall short. The
failure of these two approaches, however, should not lead us to conclude
that the resistance to admitting profile evidence is merely an unwarranted
bias, as some have urged.11 We will argue that resistance to admitting such
evidence can be vindicated by appealing to another fundamental legal
value, equality before the law. This is a familiar legal value, but we believe
that its implications for evidence law have yet to be fully appreciated.
      Equality before the law in the context of trial procedure tends to be
understood as requiring only equal consideration of innocent defen-
dants’ interests in avoiding mistaken conviction.12 In Section III, we ar-
gue instead for a novel and more demanding interpretation of equality
before the law that ascribes to innocent defendants a comparative right
that we label a right to “equal protection.”13 This is a right not to be exposed



     9. David Enoch, Talia Fisher, and Levi Spectre, “Statistical Evidence, Sensitivity, and
the Legal Value of Knowledge,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 40 (2012): 197–224; David
Enoch and Talia Fisher, “Sense and Sensitivity: Epistemic and Instrumental Approaches
to Statistical Evidence,” Stanford Law Review 67 (2015): 557–611.
     10. See David T. Wasserman, “The Morality of Statistical Proof and the Risk of Mis-
taken Liability,” Cardozo Law Review 13 (1991): 934–76; Amit Pundik, “Freedom and Gen-
eralisation,” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 37 (2016): 189–216.
     11. See Federico Picinali, “Base-Rates of Negative Traits: Instructions for Use in Crim-
inal Trials,” Journal of Applied Philosophy 33 (2016): 69–87; Redmayne, “Relevance of Bad
Character.”
     12. See Ronald Dworkin, “Principle, Policy, and Procedure,” in A Matter of Principle
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985), 89; and T. M. Scanlon, Why Does Inequality Matter?
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018), 11–25.
     13. What we call the “right to equal protection” does not refer to the Fourteenth
Amendment guarantee of equal protection under the law. We take no position here on is-
sues of constitutionality.
                                  Di Bello and O’Neil   Profile Evidence 151
to higher risks of mistaken conviction than other innocent defendants
who are facing comparably serious charges.
      We then go on, in Section IV, to show that admitting profile evidence
will infringe this right to equal protection, because if incriminating profile
evidence were admissible at trial, innocent defendants who fit an incrimi-
nating profile would be exposed to a higher risk of mistaken conviction
than other innocent defendants. Admitting exculpatory profile evidence,
such as evidence that a defendant is less likely to have committed a crime
because the defendant grew up in, say, a Good Environment, will also in-
fringe some defendants’ rights to equal protection, although it will be the
rights of defendants who do not fit exculpatory profiles rather than the
rights of defendants who do. As we will see, however, there is a stronger
overall case for overriding defendants’ equal protection rights by admit-
ting exculpatory profile evidence than there is for overriding those rights
by admitting incriminating profile evidence.
      In Sections V and VI, we turn to the implications of equal protec-
tion for the admissibility of other kinds of evidence. We will show that
the argument we gave against the admissibility of profile evidence does
not apply to eyewitness, trace, and motive evidence since they, unlike pro-
file evidence, can mistakenly incriminate any defendant. Admitting these
kinds of evidence might still give rise to unequal risks of mistaken incrim-
ination across innocent defendants, in the sense that some categories of
defendants will be more likely than others to have such evidence intro-
duced against them at trial. But we argue, perhaps surprisingly, that this
will not translate into unequal risks of mistaken conviction so long as fact
finders assess the probative value of the evidence correctly. A proper as-
sessment of the probative value of profile evidence, by contrast, will guar-
antee unequal risks of mistaken conviction. Thus, profile evidence violates
equal protection, not because fact finders cannot be trusted to evaluate
it properly, but because of the kind of evidence it is.

II. EXISTING APPROACHES

Our attempt to vindicate the intuitive resistance to admitting profile ev-
idence, as well as our evaluation of competing approaches, will be guided
by two desiderata. First, since the resistance is—we believe—motivated by
the thought that admitting profile evidence would in some way wrong de-
fendants, at least if they are innocent, we need to identify a reason against
admitting such evidence that would entail that the defendants would be
wronged by it. As we’ll see below, not all reasons against admitting pro-
file evidence would satisfy this desideratum. Secondly, what we seek is an
objection to admitting profile evidence as such. There could be objec-
tions that are peculiar to particular forms of profile evidence. When the
state uses racial or ethnic profiles, as in Ethnicity, this could unavoidably
152        Ethics        January 2020
express a false and demeaning message in a society where stereotypes that
attribute innate criminality to these groups are prevalent.14 After someone
who was convicted of a crime has paid their debt to society, it may be unjust
to use their prior crime against them, as in Prior Burglary.15 But there is also
resistance to profile evidence whatever its form. It is this broader resistance
that we aim to vindicate.16

A
Earlier we mentioned two approaches that might be capable of identify-
ing an objection to admitting profile evidence as such. One approach ap-
peals to the legal value of deterrence and shows how the admissibility of
profile evidence could reduce the deterrence effect of punishment. Con-
sider an agent deliberating about whether to commit a crime. What is
distinctive about profile evidence is that if the agent belongs to a profiled
category, the corresponding profile evidence will be available against the
agent whether or not they commit the crime. Thus, for people who fit
profiles, the admissibility of profile evidence could reduce their incentive
to abstain from the crime, because it would make their chances of being
punished less dependent on whether or not they choose to commit the
crime.17


      14. See Deborah Hellman, “Racial Profiling and the Meaning of Racial Categories,” in
Contemporary Debates in Applied Ethics, 2nd ed., ed. Andrew I. Cohen and Christopher H.
Wellman (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2014), 232–44. On the significance of the fact
that when certain social groups are profiled each instance of profiling can be expected to
contribute to a larger pattern of similar actions, see Bolinger, “Rational Impermissibility”;
Adam Omar Hosein, “Racial Profiling and a Reasonable Sense of Inferior Political Status,”
Journal of Political Philosophy 26 (2018): 1–20; and Andreas Mogensen, “Racial Profiling and
Cumulative Injustice,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 98 (2019): 452–77. For a
general discussion of how implicit racial biases generate legal and political injustices, see
Michael Cholbi and Alex Madva, “Black Lives Matter and the Call for Death Penalty Aboli-
tion,” Ethics 128 (2018): 517–44.
      15. Anthony Duff and Sandra Marshall, “Character, Propensities, and the (Mis)use of
Statistics in Criminal Trials,” in Truth and Trials: Dilemmas at the Intersection of Epistemology and
Philosophy of Law, ed. Zachary Hoskins and Jon Robson (New York: Routledge, forthcoming).
      16. Our examples may seem to trade on the fact that defendants fitting those profiles
already tend to suffer from discrimination, but the following example arouses the same in-
tuitive resistance, even though the profile does not pick out a socially salient category of
defendants: “Warrior Gene: Someone who carries the low activity allele of the MAOA gene
is twice as likely to engage in violent, aggressive, and antisocial behavior than someone who
carries the high activity allele of the MAOA gene.” See Sally McSwiggan, Bernice Elger, and
Paul S. Appelbaum, “The Forensic Use of Behavioral Genetics in Criminal Proceedings:
Case of the MAOA-L Genotype,” International Journal of Law and Psychiatry 50 (2017): 17–23.
      17. See Enoch et al., “Statistical Evidence”; and Enoch and Fisher, “Sense and Sensi-
tivity.” On the limits of the deterrence approach, see Georgi Gardiner, “Legal Burdens of
Proof and Statistical Evidence,” in The Routledge Handbook of Applied Epistemology, ed. David
Coady and James Chase (New York: Routledge, 2018), 179–95.
                                        Di Bello and O’Neil       Profile Evidence 153
      Although deterrence is obviously a legally relevant value, there are
two reasons to doubt that this approach can vindicate the resistance to
the admissibility of profile evidence. First, as the proponents of the deter-
rence approach themselves note, it is only when statistical evidence would
be enough or nearly enough on its own for a conviction that its admissi-
bility could compromise the deterrence effect of punishment. Even though
evidence like Ethnicity, Prior Burglary, and Bad Environment can have con-
siderable probative value, such evidence is not enough or nearly enough
on its own to convict someone of a crime. Thus, even if it were admissible
at trial, people belonging to these profiles would still have a strong incen-
tive to abstain from crime, since whether there would be enough evidence
overall to convict them would still depend heavily on whether they com-
mit the crime or not.18
      The second issue with the deterrence approach is that it does not
even attempt to explain how admitting profile evidence could wrong de-
fendants. Even if admitting profile evidence against defendants would
compromise deterrence, these defendants would have no special stand-
ing to complain. The state may have a duty to preserve the deterrence
value of punishment, but this is owed to the general public, not to defen-
dants in particular.

B
There is another approach to profile evidence that, unlike the deterrence
approach, does attempt to explain how its admission would wrong defen-
dants. According to this other approach, admitting profile evidence is in-
consistent with the legal commitment to respect the autonomy or individ-
uality of defendants.19 The literature has largely been dismissive of this
approach, on the grounds that there is no incompatibility between rely-
ing on profile evidence to infer what a defendant has done and viewing
the defendant as having done it autonomously.20 But there is another way of
understanding this approach that cannot be so easily dismissed, namely,
that in relying on profile evidence, the fact finders treat the defendant
merely as a member of a group and not as an individual.
     If profile evidence is admitted at trial, the fact finders may reach a de-
cision to convict based in part on a generalization about the group the de-
fendant belongs to. Even if they do not ultimately convict, profile evidence


     18. Enoch and Fisher in “Sense and Sensitivity” also note that the admissibility of
prior act evidence like Prior Burglary will not dampen incentives to avoid crime if we take
into account the period before the first crime is committed.
     19. See Wasserman, “Morality of Statistical Proof”; and Pundik, “Freedom and Gener-
alisation.”
     20. For criticisms, see Picinali, “Base-Rates of Negative Traits,” 73–75; and Mike Red-
mayne, “Exploring the Proof Paradoxes,” Legal Theory 14 (2008): 292–96.
154       Ethics        January 2020
still invites them to infer, on the basis of the defendant’s group member-
ship, that the defendant is more likely to have a propensity to commit a
type of crime, or at least a stronger propensity than others who do not be-
long to the defendant’s group. Since these inferences are based on gener-
alizations, they could treat the defendant merely as a member of a group
and not as an individual.
       But treating someone as an individual does not, on the most plau-
sible interpretation, require eschewing reliance on (accurate) generaliza-
tions. Rather, it only requires being receptive to the possibility that the in-
dividual is an exception to the generalization—that is, being receptive to
any finer-grained information that would indicate that the generalization
is not to be relied on in drawing a conclusion about the individual.21 A job
applicant who was rejected because of a criminal history could complain
of not being treated as an individual if the employer had ignored infor-
mation about the applicant’s long record of trustworthiness since the
crime or had denied the applicant an opportunity to present this infor-
mation. But a defendant in a trial is given an opportunity to introduce ev-
idence that distinguishes them from their group and is entitled to have
this information taken into consideration by the fact finders.22 In a well-
functioning courtroom, then, fact finders could use profile evidence with-
out failing to treat the defendant as an individual.23


      21. We think that this is the most plausible way of understanding Wasserman’s objec-
tion in “The Morality of Statistical Proof.” For accounts of what it is to treat someone as an
individual, see Kasper Lippert-Rasmussen, “We Are All Different: Statistical Discrimination
and the Right to Be Treated as an Individual,” Journal of Ethics 15 (2011): 47–59; Benjamin
Eidelson, “Treating People as Individuals,” in Philosophical Foundations of Discrimination Law,
ed. Deborah Hellman and Sophie Moreau (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 203–
27; and Erin Beeghly, “Failing to Treat Persons as Individuals,” Ergo 26 (2018): 687–711.
      22. When the defendant identifies with their group, as they might in the case of Eth-
nicity, they may be understandably reluctant to attempt to distinguish themselves from
their group, even when they could. To avoid forcing defendants to choose between distanc-
ing themselves from a group they identify with and defending themselves as effectively as
possible, perhaps Ethnicity and other forms of profile evidence where defendants are likely
to identify with their group should not be admissible. But this reasoning would not extend
to other examples of profile evidence like Bad Environment and Prior Burglary.
      23. For an account that relies on the moral requirement to treat defendants as indi-
viduals without falling prey to the objection we raise here, see Sarah Moss, Probabilistic
Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018), 201–30. Moss acknowledges that fact
finders could use profile evidence without failing to treat the defendant as an individual,
so long as they were alive to the possibility that the defendant is an exception to the gen-
eralization. The problem, according to Moss, is instead that when they are alive to this pos-
sibility, it becomes impossible for them to gain knowledge of a defendant’s guilt, and legal
proof requires knowledge. If legal proof without knowledge would wrong defendants,
Moss’s account is potentially a competitor to our own, but as will become clear, one note-
worthy difference is that our account entails that the use of profile evidence would wrong
defendants regardless of whether they are ultimately convicted.
                                        Di Bello and O’Neil       Profile Evidence 155
III. EQUAL PROTECTION

Neither the deterrence approach nor the autonomy approach seems able
to fully capture our resistance to the admissibility of profile evidence. We
now turn to our own proposal. We will present an argument for what
we call a “right to equal protection”—that is, a comparative right belonging
to innocent defendants not to be exposed to higher risks of mistaken
conviction than other innocent defendants facing comparably serious
charges. Our strategy will be to first describe a noncomparative right not
to be exposed to an excessive risk of mistaken conviction, which we call a
“right to due protection.” Then we will identify an intuitive, fairness-based
complaint that cannot be explained by this noncomparative right and that
can only be explained by ascribing to innocent defendants a comparative
right to equal protection. Equal protection, then, is our interpretation of
what equality before the law demands in the context of criminal trials. As
we will see in the next section, it is this comparative right to equal protec-
tion that would be infringed by rules of evidence that allow profile evidence
to be introduced at trial.

A
Criminal trials aim at accurate verdicts, that is, at convicting the guilty
and only the guilty. Trials are fallible, however, and inevitably some defen-
dants will be mistakenly convicted of a crime they did not commit. This
does not mean that the trial system cannot be justified to innocent defen-
dants. While innocent defendants cannot demand not to be exposed to
any risk of mistaken conviction at all, they do have certain rights against
these risks.24 We will understand the risks of mistaken conviction from the
ex ante perspective of lawmakers who design the trial system (more on this
later). From this perspective, the risks of mistaken conviction are a function
of the procedural protections that are provided to defendants, such as the
standard of proof, the voting rule for juries, and the rules of evidence.25
      Innocent defendants clearly have a right against being exposed to
an excessive or undue risk of mistaken conviction, but what counts as an
excessive risk? Unless we are prepared to reduce the risk to zero by abol-
ishing prosecution, we must concede that a risk greater than zero is not
excessive if it would be too costly to reduce it further. To decide whether
a risk-reducing protection is too costly, we need to balance its costs—which
can be direct, such as the costs of providing legal representation to indigent

     24. The risk of mistaken conviction for innocent defendants is the conditional prob-
ability Pr(C/I) that if a defendant is factually innocent (abbreviated I), the defendant is
convicted (abbreviated C).
     25. For the view that procedural rights are derivative substantive rights against risks,
see Larry Alexander, “Are Procedural Rights Derivative Substantive Rights?,” Law and Phi-
losophy 17 (1998): 19–42.
156       Ethics       January 2020
defendants, or indirect, such as the costs of increased crime—against the
importance of avoiding mistaken convictions.26 We accept the standard view
that, on any given charge, avoiding mistaken convictions is not only very
important but also relatively more important than avoiding mistaken
acquittals.27 Innocent defendants, then, have a right against being ex-
posed to a level of risk whose further reduction would be cost justified,
in light of the special importance of avoiding mistaken convictions. We
call this the “right to due protection.”
      Since both of the factors that must be balanced in determining due
protection—that is, the importance of avoiding mistaken convictions and
the costs of protection—can vary across categories of defendants, the right
to due protection is compatible with two types of inequalities in the risks
of mistaken conviction. First, it might be more important to avoid mis-
taken convictions for some defendants than others, depending on the
gravity of the charges against them. For example, avoiding mistaken con-
victions for murder may be more important than avoiding mistaken con-
victions for petty theft, since the condemnation and punishment associ-
ated with murder convictions are much worse. Insofar as due protection is
sensitive to the importance of avoiding mistaken convictions, what would
count as an excessive risk of mistaken conviction for defendants facing
murder charges might not count as an excessive risk for defendants fac-
ing charges of petty theft. Due protection would therefore permit the lat-
ter defendants to be exposed to a higher risk of mistaken conviction than
the former.28
      Secondly, among defendants charged with comparably serious crimes,
there can be predictable differences in the costs, whether direct or indi-
rect, of achieving a given level of protection. In terms of direct costs, it
may be more expensive to protect poor defendants who do not speak En-
glish than poor defendants who do speak English, because they may need
to be provided with a translator as well as a public defender in order to
enjoy a similar level of protection.29 In terms of indirect costs, since some
groups of defendants have higher recidivism rates than others, mistaken
acquittals of defendants from such groups could lead to more crime than
mistaken acquittals of defendants who do not belong to any of these

      26. Many procedures that reduce the risk of mistaken convictions also increase the
risk of mistaken acquittals. Retributivist theories would conceive of the indirect costs asso-
ciated with mistaken acquittals differently, for example, as guilty defendants failing to re-
ceive the censure they deserve.
      27. On this, see Adam Omar Hosein, “Doing, Allowing, and the State,” Law and Phi-
losophy 33 (2014): 239–40; Dworkin, “Principle, Policy, and Procedure”; Antony Duff, Trials
and Punishments (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).
      28. Due protection would permit this inequality only on the assumption that the costs
of mistaken acquittals on these different charges were roughly the same, as they could be if,
say, the recidivism rate for property crimes is much higher than for murder.
      29. See the amicus brief by the ACLU in the case Annie Ling v. Georgia, case n. S10-
C0460 (2010).
                                       Di Bello and O’Neil       Profile Evidence 157
groups. Since due protection is sensitive to costs, it would allow defen-
dants whose protection is more costly to be exposed to higher risks of mis-
taken conviction than defendants whose protection is less costly, even
when they are facing the same charges.

B
In order to determine whether defendants have, in addition to the right
to due protection, a comparative right against risks, we need to consider
whether either of the two inequalities described above is objectionable.
We do not think that an inequality in risks of mistaken conviction that
merely reflects differences in the importance of avoiding mistaken con-
victions would be unfair to the defendants charged with minor crimes. If
trial procedures were to be adjusted by setting the standard of proof lower
for, say, minor than for major charges, those accused of minor crimes would
be subject to higher risks compared to those accused of major crimes, but
they would not necessarily be disadvantaged since a mistaken conviction
may also be less bad for them.30
      By contrast, inequalities that reflect differences in the costs of pro-
tection do strike us as objectionable. To make this apparent, we will fo-
cus on the example about variation in indirect costs of protection due to
defendants’ different recidivism rates. There are a number of factors as-
sociated with higher recidivism, such as age, gender, neighborhood, em-
ployment, and level of education. Mistaken acquittals of guilty defendants
without a college education, for example, would lead to more crime than
mistaken acquittals of guilty college-educated defendants.31 Since the cost
of mistakenly acquitting defendants without a college education is then
predictably greater than mistakenly acquitting defendants with a college
education, due protection would, in principle, permit a lower standard of
proof for defendants without a college education than for college-educated
defendants, even when they are charged with comparably serious crimes.32
The lower standard of proof would genuinely disadvantage innocent de-
fendants without a college education, and intuitively, they would have
grounds for complaint. Exposing one category of innocent defendants to
higher risks of mistaken conviction than others simply because they are
more costly to protect seems unfair.
      We should make clear that this intuition is about their exposure to
higher risks, and not just a reflection of a prior belief that the standard
     30. In actual practice the standard of proof is fixed, but some commentators have rec-
ommended a higher standard of proof for major than for minor charges; see H. L. Ho, A
Philosophy of Evidence Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 173–229.
     31. See Lance Lochner and Enrico Moretti, “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evi-
dence from Prison, Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports,” American Economic Review 94 (2004):
155–89.
     32. Due protection permits but does not require this inequality. The state could
equalize risks without violating due protection by giving defendants without a college ed-
ucation more protection than they are due.
158        Ethics       January 2020
of proof should for some other reason be fixed.33 Even if the standard
of proof were fixed across defendants while the risks of mistaken convic-
tion were adjusted in other ways, such as by assigning six jurors to defen-
dants without a college education and twelve jurors to college-educated
defendants or by varying the jury voting rule from majority to unanimity,
defendants without a college education could still voice the same com-
plaint.34 Since the complaint of defendants without a college education
would seem to depend essentially on the fact that college-educated de-
fendants facing the same charges were treated more favorably, the expla-
nation we favor is that innocent defendants possess a certain comparative
right against risks. Specifically, we maintain that equality before the law, or
comparative fairness, demands what we have labeled “equal protection”:
that innocent defendants not be exposed to higher risks of mistaken con-
viction than other innocent defendants facing the same charges or com-
parably serious charges.
      This right to equal protection, as we have defined it, differs in an im-
portant way from another comparative right that is often cited in connec-
tion with criminal procedure, namely, a right to equal consideration. This
other right is infringed when a distribution of risks cannot be defended
except on the prohibited assumption that some defendants’ interests in
avoiding mistaken conviction are less worthy of consideration than other
defendants’ comparable interests.35 We agree that defendants possess a
comparative right to equal consideration in this sense, but this right can-
not explain the complaint of the defendants without a college education.
The choice to impose higher risks of mistaken conviction on defendants
without a college education need not reflect a view that their interests in

      33. Some argue that fact finders should deliver a guilty verdict only if they fully believe
or know that the defendant is guilty, no matter the gravity of the charge, and that a variable
standard of proof would conflict with this requirement; see Antony Duff et al., The Trial on
Trial (London: Hart, 2007), 3:89–90. Even if Duff et al. are correct about this, this concern
would not extend to altering the number of jurors or the voting rule, since these measures
are consistent with every fact finder voting guilty only if they fully believe in the defendant’s
guilt.
      34. Their complaint cannot be about the mere fact that they are being tried under
different procedures either. For suppose lawmakers knew that six jurors operating under
a unanimity voting rule were just as likely, in relation to any given body of evidence, to re-
turn a guilty verdict as twelve jurors operating under a majority voting rule. If these differ-
ent procedures delivered exactly the same degree of protection and there was no insulting
motivation behind the choice of different procedures, defendants tried under these differ-
ent procedures could have no objection.
      35. For versions of what we’re labeling a comparative right to “equal consideration,”
see Dworkin, “Principle, Policy, and Procedure,” 89; and Scanlon, Why Does Inequality Mat-
ter?, 11–25. For a useful discussion of Dworkin, see Sari Kisilevsky, “Balancing Security and
Liberty: Trying Foreign Enemy Combatants in Military Commissions,” Public Affairs Quar-
terly 31 (2017): 19–50. Due protection and equal consideration are distinct. If some groups
are given more protection than is worth the costs, while others are given exactly the level
of protection that is worth the costs, this would violate equal consideration but not due
protection.
                                         Di Bello and O’Neil         Profile Evidence 159
avoiding mistaken convictions are less worthy of concern than the inter-
ests of college-educated defendants facing similarly serious charges, but
only a difference in the costs of providing the same level of protection.
Thus, in order to explain why defendants without a college education
would have the complaint they do, we need to appeal to a comparative
right to equal protection.36

C
Equal protection is our interpretation of what equality before the law, or
comparative fairness, demands in the context of the criminal trial. In the
next section, we will explain why the admissibility of profile evidence
would infringe the right to equal protection. Before we turn to that dis-
cussion, a few final clarifications are in order.
      First, the conception of risk that is deployed in the content of the
right to equal protection is neither purely subjective nor purely objec-
tive, but rather epistemic in the sense that it should be assessed from the
evidence-relative perspective of a reasonable person. As others have ar-
gued, an epistemic conception of risk is the most suitable conception for
the morality of risk imposition in general.37 And in our view, such a concep-
tion is also especially apt for interpreting equal protection, since equality
before the law demands impartiality, and only securing equal epistemic
risks of mistaken conviction would adequately express the state’s commit-
ment to impartiality.38

       36. Since some defendants lacking a college education will also possess characteristics
that are known to reduce the risk of recidivism, such as being older or being female, they
might complain that lawmakers have failed to treat them as individuals. But suppose that
all the characteristics of each defendant were entered into the best available algorithm to
predict the chances of recidivism if guilty, and on that basis each defendant was assigned
either six or twelve jurors. It would still be the case that defendants without a college educa-
tion would be at higher risk of mistaken conviction than college-educated defendants, since
they would be at higher risk of being assigned six jurors by the algorithm. And they would
still, in our view, have a complaint against these higher risks, even though they could not
say that the system failed to treat them as individuals, since by hypothesis the algorithm
did not neglect any of the available finer-grained evidence bearing on their risk of recidivism.
       37. See John Oberdiek, Imposing Risk: A Normative Framework (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2017). This epistemic or “evidence-relative” conception of risk is neither fact-
relative (purely objective), which would require lawmakers to act on whatever the correct be-
liefs about the objective probabilities would be, nor belief-relative (purely subjective), which
would only require lawmakers to act on whatever degrees of belief they happened to have.
       38. If the epistemic risks from the perspective of lawmakers were unequal, they could
not claim to be impartial even though, unbeknownst to them, the objective risks were equal.
The same is true if the epistemic risks were unequal yet the subjective risks were equal only
because the lawmakers had buried their heads in the sand. The lawmakers could, however,
claim to be impartial if the epistemic risks were equal even though the trial process was de-
terministic and every defendant was either objectively certain to be convicted or acquitted. See
David Wasserman, “Let Them Eat Chances: Probability and Distributive Justice,” Economics
and Philosophy 12 (1996): 29–49, for an argument along similar lines that the fairness of lot-
teries depends on the way they distribute epistemic rather than objective chances.
160       Ethics        January 2020
       Second, since the right to equal protection is supposed to guide the
design of criminal procedure and evidence law, the risks of mistaken con-
viction should be assessed in light of the information available to reason-
able lawmakers, such as legislators and appellate court judges who set le-
gal precedent. This information will inevitably be limited. As they design
criminal procedure and evidence law, lawmakers cannot predict the iden-
tities of future defendants in criminal trials or the circumstances of par-
ticular future crimes. What they can know, from their ex ante point of
view, are the following: that some of the defendants will be or could be
innocent, what types of defendants there are or might be (so long as those
types are specifiable without reference to the circumstances of particular
crimes),39 what kinds of evidence there could be, and other general facts,
such as what prosecutors and defense attorneys are likely to do in response
to the rules of evidence and how fact finders would respond to bodies of
evidence. For equal protection to guide lawmakers’ decisions about the
rules of trial procedure, then, the risks to innocent defendants must be
assessed from lawmakers’ incompletely informed ex ante perspective.40
       The third clarification is that equal protection, as we have defined
it, is a right that innocent people possess as defendants. It could be in the
interests of some categories of innocent citizens that they be exposed to
higher risks of mistaken conviction, should they ever become defendants.
For example, setting a lower standard of proof for defendants without
a college education would expose innocent defendants in that category
to a higher risk of mistaken conviction, but it would also lower the risk that
guilty defendants without a college education would get away with their
crimes. If the main victims of guilty people without a college education
were innocent people without a college education, this could work out to
the net benefit of innocent people without a college education. Perhaps
higher risks of mistaken conviction could be justified in this way to in-
nocent citizens without a college education, who might become but are

      39. Knowing that there are or could be defendants belonging to a certain ethnicity,
having a certain socioeconomic status or criminal record is possible without knowing the
details of any particular crime or the identities of any particular defendant.
      40. Even when the risks are equal from the ex ante point of view of lawmakers, there
will inevitably be downstream inequalities in outcomes: some innocent defendants will be
convicted and other innocent (and guilty) defendants will be acquitted. There will also in-
evitably be more incriminating evidence against some innocent defendants than others.
But notice that there is no way for lawmakers (or anyone else) to redress these downstream
inequalities without knowing the identities of the innocents, short of abandoning prosecu-
tion entirely. By contrast, it is possible to redress inequalities in the ex ante risks of mis-
taken conviction across categories of innocent defendants by adjusting criminal trial proce-
dure. It is enough to know that there are or could be innocent defendants in each category.
Since the procedures apply to everyone, lawmakers can know whether there is an inequality
in the ex ante risk of mistaken conviction and how to correct it without knowing who the
innocent defendants are.
                                         Di Bello and O’Neil         Profile Evidence 161
not currently defendants. But the criminal trial is a distinct stage in the
criminal justice process, and equality before the law asserts itself at each
stage.41 This means that the higher risks of mistaken conviction must also
be justified to those citizens who have now become innocent defendants,
and this cannot be done, because while those higher risks may have been in
their interests as citizens, they are no longer in their interests as defen-
dants.42 Thus, unequal risks of mistaken conviction, whether brought about
by a lower standard of proof, fewer jurors, or, as we will see in the next sec-
tion, the admissibility of profile evidence, remain unfair to those innocent
defendants who are at a higher risk, even if these measures were in their
interests as assessed from an earlier stage in the criminal justice process.
      Finally, it is only innocent defendants who possess the right to equal
protection, as we have defined it. Guilty defendants, whoever they are,
are at no risk of mistaken conviction, so they are not covered by equal pro-
tection. Of course, since lawmakers do not know who is innocent and who
is guilty, they cannot respect the rights of innocent defendants without
extending the same protections to all defendants, innocent and guilty.
But are guilty defendants also entitled to something analogous to equal
protection? Since guilty defendants have no grounds for complaint if the
trial system exposes them to a higher risk of conviction than innocent de-
fendants, as any reliable trial system would, equality before the law can-
not require that everyone, guilty and innocent alike, be exposed to equal
risks of conviction. But perhaps guilty defendants have a right not to be
exposed to higher risks of correct conviction than other guilty defendants
facing comparable charges. We have less confidence that guilty defen-
dants possess a right to equal chances of avoiding conviction for a crime
they did commit than that innocent defendants have a right to equal pro-
tection, and we also have less confidence that guilty defendants would be
wronged by the use of profile evidence.43 This is why we concentrate on

     41. Ex ante contractualists may need to require justifiability to a person at each time
to avoid endorsing multistage schemes that are in everyone’s ex ante interest in the first
stage but severely burden a few in the second stage, e.g., a lottery that selects 10 patients
from 100 on which to perform deadly experiments in order to save the other 90. See
Johann Frick’s “Decomposition Test,” defended in “Contractualism and Social Risk,” Phi-
losophy and Public Affairs 43 (2015): 201–12. We believe that the same point has application
to the stages of the criminal justice system.
     42. A consideration that might, by contrast, be capable of justifying a higher risk of mis-
taken conviction to a group of defendants qua defendants would be that exposing them to a
higher risk (comparatively speaking) is necessary to lower their absolute risk of mistaken
conviction. But such a defense is not available for admitting profile evidence at trial.
     43. This is not because we doubt that guilty defendants could have any procedural
rights at all. But see Christopher H. Wellman, Rights, Forfeiture, and Punishment (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2017), 91–119, for the view that guilty defendants have no proce-
dural rights, and see David Enoch, “In Defense of Procedural Rights (or Anyway, Procedural
Duties): A Response to Wellman,” Legal Theory 24 (2018): 40–49, for a rejoinder.
162        Ethics         January 2020
innocent defendants. However, the objection to profile evidence on be-
half of innocent defendants that we develop below could easily be ex-
tended to guilty defendants by ascribing them a right to equal risks of cor-
rect conviction.

IV. AGAINST ADMITTING PROFILE EVIDENCE

Having defended the right to equal protection, we will now explain why
admitting profile evidence would conflict with it. Since it is legislators
and appellate courts setting precedents that decide evidence law, our ob-
jection is addressed to these lawmakers. We will begin by offering an ar-
gument against admitting incriminating profile evidence and then turn
to exculpatory profile evidence.

A
As a starting point, imagine a trial system whose rules forbade profile ev-
idence from being admitted during trial proceedings. If the system were
changed so that profile evidence became admissible, what would be the
consequences for defendants? By making incriminating profile evidence
admissible, the trial system would allow prosecutors to present an addi-
tional form of evidence that was probative of guilt. For example, it would
allow prosecutors to present the profile evidence in Bad Environment that
expresses a positive correlation between fitting profile BE—that is, being
male, addicted to drugs, and unemployed and having grown up in a bro-
ken home—and committing a violent crime. Presenting this evidence at
trial would increase, sometimes significantly, the probability of guilt of de-
fendants who fit profile BE.44
      Assuming that prosecutors would take advantage of opportunities to
present evidence of guilt, making profile evidence admissible would mean
that Bad Environment evidence would now be presented against defen-
dants who match the relevant profile and have been charged with a vio-
lent crime.45 By contrast, the chances that prosecutors would present the
same profile evidence against defendants who are charged with the same
crime but who do not fit profile BE would be zero, since this profile evi-
dence could not be probative of these defendants’ guilt.
      The difference just identified between defendants who fit profile
BE and defendants who do not fit this profile can be known ex ante, in


      44. See note 7.
      45. If the evidence is admissible, the probability that the prosecutor presents the ev-
idence at trial is a function of three probabilities: (i) the probability that the evidence ex-
ists; (ii) the probability that if it exists, it is discovered; and (iii) the probability that if it is
discovered, the prosecutor presents it at trial.
                                  Di Bello and O’Neil   Profile Evidence 163
advance of any particular trial or criminal investigation. Without knowing
the circumstances of any particular violent crimes, lawmakers can still
know that if an individual who matches profile BE were to become a de-
fendant charged with a violent crime, this defendant would be at a higher
risk of incrimination by Bad Environment profile evidence than would a
defendant who does not match profile BE. This difference in the risk
of incrimination would apply broadly to all defendants, and thus also
to innocent defendants. Making profile evidence such as Bad Environment
admissible across trials would therefore increase the ex ante risk that an
additional kind of incriminating evidence would be presented against
innocent defendants, but only against the innocents who fit profiles such
as BE.
      Now suppose that fact finders’ decisions to convict are rationally cal-
ibrated with the probative value of the overall body of evidence presented
at trial. When the fact finders are rationally calibrated with the body of
evidence, the more probative of guilt the body of evidence is, the more
likely the defendant will be convicted, while the less strongly probative
of guilt the body of evidence is, the less likely the defendant will be con-
victed. This has important consequences for the distribution of the ex
ante risks of mistaken conviction. Since admitting evidence that shows
a positive correlation between fitting profile BE and committing a violent
crime would make the overall body of evidence more probative of guilt,
this admission should, by calibration, increase the risk of mistaken convic-
tion for the innocents who fit profile BE. However, it would not increase
the risk of mistaken conviction for innocents who do not fit this profile.
And the more Bad Environment evidence adds to the probative value of
the overall body of evidence, the more its admission should, again by cal-
ibration, increase the risk of mistaken conviction for the innocent defen-
dants who fit profile BE.
      This conclusion applies not only to defendants who fit profile BE
but also to any defendant who fits a profile that is positively correlated
with committing a violent crime. Any such defendant would be subject
to an increased risk of mistaken conviction for violent crimes. But, cru-
cially, this increased risk would also be limited to those defendants. Inno-
cent defendants charged with violent crimes who were fortunate enough
to not fit any profile that was positively correlated with committing a vi-
olent crime would be immune to incrimination by profile evidence.
      The same argument we gave for profiles correlated with violent
crimes can also be applied to profiles correlated with other types of crimes,
such as Ethnicity and drug smuggling, Prior Burglary and burglary, and so
on. The profiles in question may pick out features that structure interac-
tions across a wide range of social contexts, such as ethnicity, gender, age,
and class. But they might also pick out features that are not socially salient
164       Ethics        January 2020
at all, such as genetic characteristics.46 All that is required for the argu-
ment to apply is that it be possible for lawmakers to distinguish, in ad-
vance of particular trials, between those who fall under a profile positively
correlated with a type of crime and those who do not.

B
We can now see why admitting incriminating profile evidence at trial
would conflict with defendants’ right to equal protection. We have seen
that the admission of profile evidence would increase the ex ante risk of
mistaken conviction for all and only innocent defendants who match a
relevant incriminating profile. This increase in risk would, in turn, expose
them to a higher risk of mistaken conviction than other innocent defen-
dants, other things being equal.47 The profiled defendants burdened by a
higher risk of mistaken conviction, then, would have an equal protection–
based complaint against a trial system that admitted incriminating profile
evidence.48 This is our objection to admitting incriminating profile evi-
dence at trial.49


      46. See, e.g., Warrior Gene in note 16.
      47. If innocent defendants who fit a certain profile antecedently enjoy a lower risk of
mistaken conviction, the increase in risk brought about by admitting profile evidence
might reduce, not create, an inequality. But there is no reason to think that admitting pro-
file evidence would systematically redress imbalances in the prior distribution of risks. In
fact, since many forms of profile evidence target categories of defendants who may already
be at a disadvantage, in terms of access to quality legal representation, admitting profile
evidence would if anything tend to exacerbate antecedent inequalities in the risks of mis-
taken conviction rather than reduce them.
      48. The right to equal protection is a right not to be exposed to a higher risk of mis-
taken conviction than other innocent defendants on trial for comparably serious crimes—
that is, on trial for the same crime or a different but comparably serious crime. Note that it
is possible for a type of defendant to be at a higher risk for the same or a comparably se-
rious crime without being at a higher risk in relation to a class of comparably serious
crimes. Suppose that A’s are more likely to commit car theft and B’s are more likely to com-
mit motorcycle theft. If profile evidence is admissible, neither A’s nor B’s will be at higher
risk of mistaken conviction in relation to the class of comparably serious crimes consisting
of car theft and motorcycle theft. But A’s on trial for car theft would have an equal protec-
tion complaint, since A’s would be at higher risk of mistaken conviction for car theft than
B’s, and B’s on trial for motorcycle theft would have an equal protection complaint, since
B’s would be at higher risk of mistaken conviction for motorcycle theft than A’s. We thank
one of the associate editors of this journal for the example.
      49. Our objection applies to all profile evidence, even when the profile is a matter of
choice. This might be challenged. An associate editor suggested that the right to equal pro-
tection should be responsibility sensitive, in the sense that exposing a class of defendants to
higher risks of mistaken conviction would be acceptable so long as these defendants had a
fair opportunity to avoid those higher risks. The rules of evidence could then admit profile
evidence involving profiles that defendants would match only because of earlier choices
they had made. We do not have an argument against choice sensitivity in the context of
trial procedure, but we think that recognizing innocent defendants’ equal status requires
                                         Di Bello and O’Neil       Profile Evidence 165
     The complaint against admitting incriminating profile evidence
cannot be justified by appealing to either of the other rights we discussed
in Section III. It cannot be justified by invoking the noncomparative right
to due protection because there is no reason to think that admitting in-
criminating profile evidence would expose innocent defendants to an ex-
cessive risk of mistaken conviction. Nor can the complaint be justified by
invoking the comparative right to equal consideration. Equal consider-
ation, unlike equal protection, is compatible with unequal risks when these
different risks reflect differences in the costs of protection. Since equal-
izing these risks by excluding profile evidence would come at a cost in
terms of mistaken acquittals of the profiled defendants, a choice to leave
the inequality intact need not imply that the interests of the disadvan-
taged defendants in avoiding mistaken convictions have been given less
weight.50

C
So far we have only discussed profile evidence in its incriminating form,
but profile evidence can also take an exculpatory form. For example, a
defendant who attended college might seek to present as exculpatory ev-
idence the fact that attending college is negatively correlated with com-
mitting the type of crime they have been accused of. Should profile ev-
idence in its exculpatory form be inadmissible as well? The law does look
more favorably on admitting at least certain kinds of exculpatory profile
evidence, such as good character evidence.51 And we suspect that there
may be less intuitive resistance to admitting profile evidence that would



abstracting away from most and perhaps all differences due to choices. Even if all innocent
defendants who fit crime-correlated descriptions like “lacks a college education,” “is unem-
ployed,” or “is unmarried” had what could be considered a fair opportunity to avoid falling
under those descriptions, this would not license exposing these defendants to a higher risk
of mistaken conviction than innocent defendants who had made different choices in life.
Even defendants’ earlier illegal choices, as in Prior Burglary, would not warrant exposure to
higher risks after they have paid their debt to society. We concede, however, that choice
sensitivity may have more plausibility in relation to certain choices, such as a choice to as-
sociate with members of a criminal organization. For an example of a principle of fairness
that is, unlike our principle of equal protection, thoroughly responsibility sensitive, see
Mogensen, “Racial Profiling.”
     50. As a referee has pointed out, if lawmakers knew that there would be only one trial
and knew the identity of the only defendant, then a decision to admit profile evidence
against that defendant would not be vulnerable to our objection. If using profile evidence
against that defendant still seems objectionable, our account cannot capture that objec-
tion. But if there were a second trial, and the lawmakers decided to admit profile evidence,
knowing that it could only be used against the first and not the second defendant, the first
defendant would surely have a stronger complaint, and our account can capture that.
     51. See, e.g., Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 404(a)(1).
166       Ethics       January 2020
exculpate rather than incriminate defendants. After all, since the admis-
sibility of exculpatory profile evidence could only help innocent defen-
dants, not hurt them, who could object? As we will explain below, how-
ever, there are defendants who could have legitimate objections to the
admissibility of exculpatory profile evidence.
      Notice first that, even if incriminating profile evidence were inad-
missible, the admissibility of exculpatory profile evidence could still in-
crease the risk of mistaken conviction for defendants who fit incriminat-
ing profiles in the following way. If exculpatory profile evidence were
admissible, fact finders might infer from the fact that it was not presented
by the defense that the defendant must fall under an incriminating pro-
file. For example, if it were customary for the defense to announce that a
defendant had no criminal record whenever a defendant had no criminal
record, fact finders could infer from the absence of such an announce-
ment in a particular case that the defendant in this case must have a crim-
inal record.52 Thus, admitting exculpatory profile evidence could have
the same effect on defendants who fit incriminating profiles that admit-
ting incriminating profile evidence would.
      But suppose that we could prevent this effect by instructing fact find-
ers not to draw any adverse inferences from the fact that no exculpatory
profile evidence was presented on behalf of a defendant, just as they are
instructed not to draw adverse inferences from the fact that a defendant
chose not to testify. If these instructions were effective, then admitting
exculpatory profile evidence would not increase the risk of mistaken con-
viction for defendants who fit incriminating profiles, and it would only
reduce the risk for defendants who fit exculpatory profiles. Who, then,
could be wronged? Obviously defendants who fit exculpatory profiles,
such as defendants who have graduated from college, would have no com-
plaint. But if we take up the perspective of defendants who are just as in-
nocent but cannot avail themselves of this exculpatory evidence because
they are not college graduates, we can begin to see how the admissibility
of exculpatory evidence could be unfair to them. Our account can cap-
ture their complaint, since the right to equal protection is a right not
to be exposed to a higher risk of mistaken conviction than other innocent
defendants, and innocent defendants can be exposed to a higher risk ei-
ther because their risk was increased or because the risk to other defen-
dants was lowered.
      Still, incriminating profile evidence and exculpatory profile evi-
dence are not entirely on a par. Banning incriminating profile evidence
would realize equal protection by enhancing or “leveling up” the level of

    52. An anonymous reviewer made this point. For further discussion, see Larry Laudan
and Ronald J. Allen, “The Devastating Impact of Prior Crimes Evidence and Other Myths of
the Criminal Justice Process,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 101 (2013): 493–528.
                                       Di Bello and O’Neil       Profile Evidence 167
protection (i.e., reducing the level of risk) for some, namely, defendants
who match incriminating profiles. By contrast, banning exculpatory pro-
file evidence would realize equal protection by reducing or “leveling
down” the level of protection (i.e., increasing the level of risk) for some,
namely, defendants who match exculpatory profiles. That equal protec-
tion may demand leveling down as well as leveling up just follows from
the fact that it is a genuinely comparative right. But rights like equal pro-
tection can be overridden, and there is reason to think that the case for
admitting exculpatory profile evidence may be strong enough to over-
ride equal protection’s demand that this evidence be excluded.
      The case for admitting exculpatory profile evidence might, for ex-
ample, appeal to the right to due protection, which calls for measures
that reduce the risk of mistaken conviction, so long as they are cost justi-
fied. Admitting exculpatory profile evidence is a measure that would re-
duce the risk of mistaken conviction for defendants who fit exculpatory
profiles, and although admitting this evidence would result in mistaken
acquittals, there is no reason to think that it would result in more mistaken
acquittals than would other forms of exculpatory evidence that are rou-
tinely admitted at trial.53 If due protection does demand admitting ex-
culpatory profile evidence, then there would be a conflict between the
due protection rights of those who fit exculpatory profiles and the equal
protection rights of those who do not. Arguably the due protection rights
should prevail and exculpatory profile evidence ought to be admitted, all
things considered, even though this would be unfair to some defendants.54
There could not, by contrast, be a conflict between due protection and
equal protection in the case of incriminating profile evidence, since no
one’s due protection rights could demand that incriminating profile evi-
dence be admitted.
      We have seen that admitting incriminating profile evidence would
create an inequality in the distribution of the risks of mistaken convic-
tion, and that admitting exculpatory profile evidence would do so as well.
But what would be the overall effect on the risks of mistaken conviction
of admitting both forms of profile evidence? Defendants who are accused

     53. If Enoch and Fisher are right that admitting profile evidence would also compro-
mise deterrence to some extent, then admitting exculpatory profile evidence could be
more costly than admitting other forms of exculpatory evidence, and it is at least possible
that due protection could require admitting other forms of exculpatory evidence but not
profile evidence.
     54. If we treat the demands of equality here as contingent on the availability of mea-
sures that would not infringe anyone else’s noncomparative rights, as some egalitarians
have recommended in other contexts (see Matthew Clayton, “Equality, Justice and Legiti-
macy in Selection,” Journal of Moral Philosophy 9 [2012]: 8–30), equal protection may not
even demand banning exculpatory profile evidence. Due protection is one candidate non-
comparative right. A basic liberty belonging to innocent defendants to mount a defense to
the best of their ability is another.
168       Ethics       January 2020
of a crime may fit some profiles that are incriminating and some profiles
that are exculpatory. Conceivably, there could be a defendant for whom
every incriminating profile that they fit is exactly canceled out by another
exculpatory profile that they also fit. But for almost all defendants, tak-
ing into account both incriminating and exculpatory profile evidence
would make a defendant’s guilt, on balance, either more probable or less
probable than it would be without that evidence.55 By calibration, then,
admitting both forms of profile evidence should increase the risk of mis-
taken conviction for some innocent defendants and decrease it for others,
thereby creating inequalities in the risks of mistaken conviction across in-
nocent defendants.

V. IS PROFILE EVIDENCE UNIQUE?

Our argument against admitting incriminating profile evidence rests on
a simple idea. From their ex ante perspective, lawmakers can predict that
some defendants, including innocent ones, will be incriminated by pro-
file evidence because they fit an incriminating profile. The lawmakers
can also predict that other defendants will not be incriminated by profile
evidence because they do not fit an incriminating profile. As a conse-
quence of admitting profile evidence, then, those defendants who fit in-
criminating profiles will be exposed to a higher risk of mistaken conviction
than other defendants, thus violating their rights to equal protection.56
      But is profile evidence unique in this respect, or do other kinds of
evidence that are routinely admitted at trial, such as eyewitness testimony,
trace evidence, and motive evidence, also violate equal protection? There
is a critical difference between profile evidence and other kinds of evi-
dence, namely, lawmakers can know in advance of particular trials who
can and who cannot be incriminated by profile evidence, but they can-
not know who can and who cannot be incriminated by eyewitness testi-
mony, trace evidence, or motive evidence. This critical difference will be
key to understanding why admitting profile evidence at trial would yield
unequal risks of mistaken conviction, while admitting these other kinds
of evidence would not.

A
We begin with eyewitness testimony evidence, which is probative of a de-
fendant’s guilt when the defendant fits the physical description of the

     55. Assuming that incriminating features tend to cluster together, if someone were to
fit one incriminating profile such as Bad Environment, that would make it more likely that
they fit other incriminating profiles and less likely that they fit exculpatory profiles.
     56. Admitting exculpatory profile evidence will infringe the equal protection rights of
defendants who do not fit exculpatory profiles, but since their rights are more likely to be
overridden, we focus here on profile evidence in its incriminating form.
                                         Di Bello and O’Neil       Profile Evidence 169
perpetrator that has been provided by an eyewitness. This is a fallible form
of evidence, in the sense that an innocent defendant could be mistakenly
incriminated by it. But there is no way for lawmakers to know in advance
of particular trials what, if any, physical descriptions of the culprit would
be given by eyewitnesses. Since any physical description could be incrim-
inating if it is provided by an eyewitness to the crime the defendant is ac-
cused of, there is no innocent defendant who is immune to mistaken in-
crimination by this form of evidence.
      The same can be said of trace evidence. When physical traces are
found at a crime scene, they will be analyzed for certain characteristics
that are statistically uncommon, such as genetic profiles or fingerprint
patterns. If the defendant matches the traces—that is, if the defendant
and the traces share the relevant characteristic—the match will be incrim-
inating. Trace evidence, like eyewitness testimony, is fallible. An analyst
might have made a mistake, or the perpetrator and an innocent defen-
dant might coincidentally share the same characteristic. But again, as with
eyewitness testimony, there is no type of defendant who is immune to be-
ing mistakenly incriminated by trace evidence. For example, anyone with
DNA could be incriminated by DNA evidence—it all depends on whether
their DNA matches the DNA of a sample found at a crime scene.
      So we see that both eyewitness testimony and trace evidence differ
from profile evidence because, from the ex ante perspective of lawmak-
ers, any type of innocent defendant can be mistakenly incriminated by
them. This is important since our argument in Section IV against admit-
ting profile evidence relied on the premise that this evidence cannot mis-
takenly incriminate any type of defendant but can only incriminate de-
fendants who fit incriminating profiles. Since the same premise is not
true of eyewitness testimony and trace evidence, the same argument can-
not be used to show that admitting these forms of evidence would violate
equal protection.

B
The fact that profile evidence can only incriminate some types of defen-
dants distinguishes it from a variety of kinds of evidence, even those that
would seem to resemble profile evidence quite closely.57 Consider motive


      57. The literature about statistical evidence at trial often discusses hypothetical sce-
narios such as Gatecrasher. Suppose camera footage shows that, on a particular day and
time, one thousand people gathered in a stadium, but the ticket sales indicate that only
fifty tickets were purchased. This means that 95 percent of the people in the stadium that
day entered illegally by crashing the gates. Although we cannot tell who gatecrashed and
who did not, it is very likely that any spectator picked at random did gatecrash. Our argu-
ment in Sec. IV that admitting profile evidence would violate equal protection does not
apply to Gatecrasher-like evidence because this kind of evidence can incriminate any
170       Ethics       January 2020
evidence, such as “the defendant recently fought with the murder vic-
tim” or “the defendant stood to gain financially from the death of the vic-
tim.” Both motive evidence and profile evidence exploit generalizations
about what people who are similar to the defendant in some respect are
more likely to do. Just as profile evidence can incriminate only defen-
dants who fit profiles correlated with the types of crime they are accused
of, motive evidence can incriminate only defendants who fit descriptions
like “fought with the victim” or “stood to gain financially from the death
of the victim.” The resemblance between profile evidence and motive ev-
idence is so close that scholars have struggled to find reasons for why the
two kinds of evidence should be treated differently at trial.58
      Despite the close resemblance between profile evidence and motive
evidence, we should not overlook a crucial difference between them
which can be brought into clear focus by taking into account the ex ante
perspective of lawmakers. Lawmakers can know, in advance of particu-
lar crimes, who would fit and who would not fit an incriminating profile.
Defendants who do not fit any profile that is correlated with the type of
crime they are accused of will be immune to mistaken incrimination by
profile evidence. But lawmakers cannot know, in advance of particular
crimes with particular victims, who would fall under such descriptions
as “fought with the victim” or “stood to gain financially from the death
of the victim.” Whether someone falls under some such description
for a crime they are accused of will depend on the circumstances of that
particular crime, and because the circumstances of particular crimes will
vary, any innocent person could find themselves falling under some such

defendant. From the ex ante point of view of lawmakers, there is no defendant who could
not be incriminated by this evidence since anyone could find themselves at some event
or other where a significant proportion of the attendees committed a certain crime. Those
who regard profile evidence and Gatecrasher-like evidence as entirely on a par might insist
on a unified account of their inadmissibility, which we have not provided. Still, the well-
established intuition in the literature is only that Gatecrasher-like evidence is insufficient
for a guilty verdict, not that it should be inadmissible. For early work on this puzzle, see,
e.g., L. J. Cohen, The Probable and the Provable (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977);
Charles R. Nesson, “Reasonable Doubt and Permissive Inferences: The Value of Complex-
ity,” Harvard Law Review 92 (1979): 1187–1225; Judith Jarvis Thomson, “Liability and Indi-
vidualized Evidence,” Law and Contemporary Problems 49 (1986): 199–219. For more recent
work, see, e.g., Moss, Probabilistic Knowledge; Martin Smith, “When Does Evidence Suffice
for Conviction?,” Mind 127 (2018): 1193–1218; and Clayton Littlejohn, “Truth, Knowledge,
and the Standard of Proof in Criminal Law,” Synthese (forthcoming). For a risk-based argu-
ment against convictions that rest on Gatecrasher-like evidence, see Marcello Di Bello, “Trial
by Statistics: Is a High Probability of Guilt Enough to Convict?,” Mind (forthcoming).
      58. Michael Redmayne in Character in the Criminal Trial (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2015) is skeptical that there is any reason to exclude character evidence like Prior
Burglary that would not also be a reason to exclude motive evidence. Our account does
identify such a reason since admitting bad character evidence like Prior Burglary would vi-
olate equal protection but admitting bad motive evidence does not.
                                          Di Bello and O’Neil        Profile Evidence 171
description. To illustrate, any innocent person could have a motive to
murder someone or other. If any of those people were ever murdered,
this innocent person would then fall under some description like “stood
to gain from the death of the victim” of that murder and could be mis-
takenly incriminated by motive evidence. Thus, from the ex ante point
of view of lawmakers, there is no one who is immune to mistaken incrim-
ination by motive evidence.59
      The difference between profile evidence and other forms of evi-
dence—namely, that profile evidence can only mistakenly incriminate
some types of defendants and not others, while eyewitness, trace, and mo-
tive evidence can incriminate any type of defendant—is not attributable
to the fact that profile evidence is statistical while other kinds of evidence
are not. Profile evidence is a form of statistical evidence, but eyewitness,
trace, and motive evidence can also be presented together with statistical
generalizations about, say, the typical error rates of eyewitnesses under
certain conditions, the frequency of genetic profiles, or the likelihood
that someone who fought with another person would later kill them.
While the availability of such statistics at trial can help the fact finders as-
sess probative value correctly, it does not change the fact that eyewitness,
trace, and motive evidence can mistakenly incriminate any type of inno-
cent defendant, since the statistics in question do not constrain who can
be incriminated by these forms of evidence.60

VI. RISKS OF INCRIMINATION VERSUS RISKS OF CONVICTION

We’ve explained how eyewitness testimony, trace evidence, and motive
evidence could mistakenly incriminate any defendant, unlike profile ev-
idence. This key difference means that the argument in Section IV, which
showed why admitting profile evidence would threaten equal protection,
is inapplicable to these other kinds of evidence. But even if that argu-
ment does not apply to them, there might be other grounds for thinking
that their admissibility at trial would pose a threat to equal protection.

      59. To be sure, lawmakers cannot know who would end up committing burglary ei-
ther. If they were to consider people at birth, they could not predict where people would
end up in their adult lives. But the ex ante perspective of lawmakers is located in advance of
particular trials, not behind a veil of ignorance. Before any particular trial for burglary, law-
makers can know who committed burglary before, but they can have no knowledge of the
circumstances of particular crimes.
      60. The availability of statistics about the frequency of genetic profiles could, however,
make it the case that defendants with genetic profiles that are statistically more common
could not be as strongly incriminated by DNA trace evidence as defendants with less com-
mon genetic profiles. Similarly, statistics about the reliability of eyewitness identifications
could make it the case that defendants with a more common appearance could not be
as strongly incriminated as others. For a discussion of this point in terms of probative value,
see Sec. VI.
172       Ethics      January 2020
Even though any innocent defendant can be mistakenly incriminated by
these other kinds of evidence, what if some defendants are more likely to
be mistakenly incriminated by them than others? We will argue that, al-
though admitting eyewitness testimony and other kinds of evidence might
well give rise to different risks of mistaken incrimination, this should not
give rise to different risks of mistaken conviction if the probative value of
the evidence is assessed correctly.

A
At first glance, there is no reason to think that there are any types of in-
nocent defendants who would be more likely than others to be misiden-
tified by an eyewitness, to misleadingly match a DNA sample found at a
crime scene, or to have had a motive to commit a crime they have been
falsely accused of. And if no types of innocent defendants are more likely
to be mistakenly incriminated than any others by these kinds of evidence,
then admitting them should not expose any defendants to a higher risk of
mistaken conviction and thus would not threaten any defendants’ rights
to equal protection.
      On closer examination, however, lawmakers could have reason to
believe that some types of defendants would be more vulnerable to mis-
taken incrimination by these kinds of evidence than others. Lawmakers
might, for example, have good reason to believe that some innocent de-
fendants would be at a predictably higher risk of mistaken incrimination
by eyewitness testimony compared to others. For one thing, eyewitnesses
may be worse at identifying some types of defendants than others. Cross-
racial identifications are known to be less reliable than intraracial ones.61
If eyewitnesses on average are less reliable at identifying black defendants
than they are at identifying white defendants, then innocent black defen-
dants could be more likely to be mistakenly incriminated by eyewitness
testimony than innocent white defendants.62 And even when reliability
is the same, there may be other reasons why some innocent defendants
are at a higher risk of mistaken incrimination by eyewitness testimony
than others. For example, since people who live in high-crime areas will
be seen near a crime scene more often, the risk that they would be mis-
identified as perpetrators would be higher compared to innocent people


     61. A meta-analysis found that an innocent black suspect has a 56 percent greater
chance of being misidentified by a white eyewitness than by a black eyewitness. See C. A.
Meissner and J. C. Brigham, “Thirty Years of Investigating the Own-Race Bias in Memory
for Faces: A Meta-analytic Review,” Psychology, Public Policy, and Law 7 (2001): 3–35.
     62. If we assume that a black defendant is more likely to be incriminated by a white
eyewitness than a white defendant by a black eyewitness, the 56 percent difference (see
note 61) would expose innocent black defendants to a higher risk of misidentification than
innocent white defendants.
                                        Di Bello and O’Neil       Profile Evidence 173
living in low-crime areas even assuming that eyewitnesses are no more re-
liable at identifying people in low-crime areas than in high-crime areas.
      It is tempting to conclude that these differences in the risk of incrim-
ination automatically translate into differences in the risk of conviction.
If, from the ex ante point of view, the bodies of evidence against one type
of innocent defendant are more likely to contain a piece of incriminat-
ing eyewitness testimony than the bodies of evidence against other inno-
cent defendants, and all else is equal, wouldn’t it follow that the first type
of defendant would be exposed to a higher risk of mistaken conviction?
If this is correct, then some types of defendants will be more likely to be
mistakenly convicted by eyewitness testimony than others, and their rights
to equal protection would be infringed.

B
While this piece of reasoning sounds appealing, it contains a subtle mis-
take. Different risks of mistaken incrimination by eyewitness testimony
need not, and should not, result in different risks of mistaken convic-
tion. The first thing to note here is that eyewitness testimony, like any
kind of evidence, should be assigned the right probative value. In order
to assign evidence the right probative value, we must assess the risk that
it would mistakenly incriminate an innocent defendant. The higher the
risk of mistaken incrimination by the evidence, the lower the probative
value of the evidence. After all, the more prone to error the evidence, the
weaker the evidence. This is how evidence should be rationally weighed.63
Consequently, if people living in high-crime areas are at higher risk of
being mistakenly incriminated by eyewitness testimony, then eyewitness
testimony against them should be assigned a lower probative value than
eyewitness testimony against those who live in low-crime areas. The same
applies to testimonies against black versus white defendants.
      The second thing to note is that if fact finders are rational, their
readiness to convict on a body of evidence depends on the overall proba-
tive value of that body. This is the rational calibration principle we intro-
duced in Section IV. If an eyewitness testimony against a defendant in a
high-crime area should be judged as less probative than a similar testimony

     63. The strength or probative value of evidence E relative to a pair of competing hy-
potheses—in our case, the defendant’s guilt G and innocence I—is measured by the like-
lihood ratio Pr(E/G)/Pr(E/I). The higher Pr(E/G)/Pr(E/I) (for values above 1), the
more probative of guilt the evidence. This also means that the higher Pr(E/I)—which
tracks the risk of mistaken incrimination by evidence E—the lower the likelihood ratio
and thus the lower the probative value of evidence E. See, e.g., Philip Dawid, “Bayes’s The-
orem and Weighing Evidence by Juries,” in Bayes’s Theorem, ed. Richard Swinburne (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002), 71–90; and Marcello Di Bello and Bart Verheij, “Evidential
Reasoning,” in Handbook of Legal Reasoning and Argumentation, ed. Giorgio Bongiovanni et al.
(Dordrecht: Springer, 2018), 447–93.
174       Ethics        January 2020
against a defendant in a low-crime area, adding the former testimony to
the overall body of evidence should increase its probative value—and, by
calibration, the risk of conviction—by less than the latter testimony. The
same can be said of testimonies against black defendants as opposed to
testimonies against white defendants.
     So even though some defendants are at a predictably higher risk of
mistaken incrimination by eyewitness evidence, this higher risk is offset
by the fact that eyewitness evidence against them should be assigned a
lower probative value. This lower probative value, by calibration, should
lead to a smaller increase in the risk of conviction when eyewitness evi-
dence is presented against innocent defendants whose risk of incrimina-
tion is higher. Thus, if fact finders are rationally calibrated to the bodies
of evidence against defendants, admitting eyewitness testimony would
not subject innocent defendants who are at higher risk of mistaken incrim-
ination to a higher risk of mistaken conviction.
     This point generalizes to any form of evidence that exposes some
defendants to a higher risk of mistaken incrimination than others, so long
as the evidence is capable of mistakenly incriminating any type of defen-
dant. For example, although the diagnostic power of DNA testing should
be the same regardless of the individual being tested, different laborato-
ries might follow different standards, and this might result in predictably
different risks of false-positive matches for different defendants. But if
the match is the result of a laboratory analysis with a higher error rate, it
should be assigned a lower probative value compared to a match resulting
from a laboratory analysis with a lower error rate.64 Whenever some defen-
dants—for whatever reason—are at higher risk of mistaken incrimination
by DNA evidence, this higher risk should be offset by assigning it a lower
probative value.65

C
Let’s take stock. We first argued that any type of innocent defendant can
be mistakenly incriminated by forms of evidence such as eyewitness tes-
timony, trace evidence, and motive evidence. But it does not follow from
this that no type of defendant could be at higher risk of being mistakenly

     64. Forensic scientists have recommended that laboratory error rates be taken into
account while assessing the probative value of a DNA match; see, e.g., John S. Buckleton,
Jo-Anne Bright, and Duncan Taylor, eds., Forensic DNA Evidence Interpretation, 2nd ed. (Boca
Raton, FL: CRP, 2016).
     65. The frequency of genetic profiles also affects the risk of false-positive DNA matches.
The higher the frequency of the profile, the higher the risk of a false-positive match. This
difference in the risk of false positives can be offset by the right assessment of probative
value. The forensic literature is clear that the probative value of DNA matches should re-
flect differences in the frequencies of profiles; see Buckleton et al., Forensic DNA Evidence
Interpretation.
                                        Di Bello and O’Neil       Profile Evidence 175
incriminated by these other forms of evidence, and in fact, some types of
defendants may well be more likely to be mistakenly incriminated by them.
Nevertheless, we showed that different risks of mistaken incrimination by
these forms of evidence will not lead to different risks of mistaken convic-
tion if the fact finders assess their probative value correctly.
      In order to adjust their assessment of the probative value of the ev-
idence and prevent inequalities in the risks of mistaken conviction from
arising, fact finders will need to be informed about the risk of mistaken
incrimination by that evidence. Equal protection, then, requires admit-
ting various statistical generalizations at trial: error rates of laboratories
that do DNA testing, statistics about the reliability of eyewitnesses in differ-
ent circumstances, and so on. If the fact finders are not given this infor-
mation (and they often are not), admitting eyewitness testimony and other
forms of evidence could violate equal protection. But there are already
reasons of accuracy to give them this information.66 In a well-functioning
courtroom, then, admitting these forms of evidence would not violate
equal protection.
      This prompts a question. If a correct assessment of the probative
value of eyewitness and trace evidence would prevent unequal risks of mis-
taken incrimination from yielding unequal risks of mistaken conviction,
why wouldn’t a correct assessment of the probative value of profile evi-
dence do the same? Recall the key difference between these other forms
of evidence and profile evidence: namely, eyewitness and trace evidence
can incriminate any defendant, while profile evidence can only incrimi-
nate defendants who fit incriminating profiles correlated with the type
of crime they are accused of. If the fact finders were to assess the probative
value of, say, Prior Burglary, they should not regard this evidence as proba-
tive of the guilt of defendants who have not committed prior burglaries.
They should, however, regard it as probative of the guilt of defendants
who have committed prior burglaries—the stronger the correlation, the
more probative the evidence.
      Thus, if the probative value of profile evidence is assessed correctly,
this evidence should be regarded as probative of guilt when it is presented
against defendants who fit incriminating profiles and should not be re-
garded as probative of guilt when it is presented against defendants who
do not fit such profiles. Admitting this evidence at trial would therefore,
by calibration, increase the risks of mistaken conviction for those who
fit profiles but not for those who do not. The only assessments of its

     66. Although there is typically no legal requirement that the fact finders be informed
about eyewitness reliability—see, e.g., Laura Connelly, “Cross-Racial Identifications: Solu-
tions to the ‘They All Look Alike’ Effect,” Michigan Journal of Race and Law 21 (2015): 125–
45—the Supreme Court of New Jersey has required jury instructions to inform jurors about
sources of unreliability of eyewitness evidence; see State v. Henderson, 27 A.3d 872 (NJ
2011).
176       Ethics       January 2020
probative value that could preserve equal risks of mistaken conviction would
be either to assign profile evidence no probative value against defendants
who fit profiles or to assign it the same probative value against defendants
who do not fit profiles as against defendants who do. But neither assess-
ment is correct.

VII. CONCLUSION

We set out to vindicate the intuition that admitting profile evidence at
trial wrongs defendants. We showed why admitting profile evidence at
trial would expose some defendants to a higher risk of mistaken convic-
tion than others, infringing their rights to equal protection. Our account
can also explain why admitting other forms of evidence, such as eyewit-
ness testimony, trace evidence, and motive evidence, would not be incon-
sistent with equal protection. Although admitting other forms of evidence
can expose some defendants to a higher risk of mistaken incrimination
than others, it will not expose them to higher risks of mistaken conviction,
so long as the fact finders properly assess the probative value of the evi-
dence. But it is precisely when fact finders assess the probative value of
profile evidence correctly that admitting it would violate some defendants’
equal protection rights. The fault lies with profile evidence, not with the
fact finders.
      Our argument has been restricted to the question of the admissibil-
ity of profile evidence during the guilt phase of criminal trials. This is not
the only criminal justice context in which profile evidence may be used.
In closing, we will briefly compare our fairness-based objection to the use
of profile evidence at trial with a similar objection to the use of profile ev-
idence in policing.67 Just as we showed that admitting profile evidence at
trial would expose some innocent defendants to a higher risk of mistaken
conviction, a similar line of argument could be used to show that permit-
ting profiling in policing would expose innocent citizens belonging to
the profiled groups to a higher risk of mistaken stops and searches. Would
these higher risks of mistaken stops and searches be unfair to those inno-
cent citizens?68


     67. For a useful overview of definitions of racial profiling in policing and arguments
for and against it, see Katerina Hadjimatheou, “Racial Profiling,” in The SAGE Encyclopedia
of Surveillance, Security, and Privacy (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2018), 823–25.
     68. There appears to be some support for the view that they would be. Some scholars
have argued that even an idealized form of racial profiling (i.e., rational and respectful)
would be unfair because it would disproportionately burden innocent members of the pro-
filed race. For versions of this objection, see Randall Kennedy, Race, Crime, and the Law
(New York: Vintage, 1997), 159–61; and Naomi Zack, White Privilege and Black Rights: The
Injustice of U.S. Police Racial Profiling and Homicide (New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015),
55. As stated, this is an objection on behalf of a group, not individual citizens, but this
                                         Di Bello and O’Neil        Profile Evidence 177
      The fact that policing is a criminal justice context, governed by
equality before the law, lends plausibility to the view that being exposed
to a higher risk of mistaken stops and searches is unfair. On the other
hand, some have argued that it would not be unreasonable to expect in-
nocent citizens to accept a higher risk of such a burden when this would
promote an important public good like security, provided that society
displayed reciprocity along other dimensions.69 And even if it would be
unfair to impose higher (and uncompensated) risks of mistaken stops
and searches on some innocent citizens for the sake of the public good of
security, some have argued that it would not be unfair if the same group
of innocent citizens who were exposed to a higher risk of stops by the prac-
tice of profiling also gained more security than others, so that they were
net beneficiaries of the practice. This might be the case if the main victims
of guilty citizens belonging to the profiled group were other innocent cit-
izens belonging to the same group.70
      Whether or not these considerations successfully defuse the charge
of unfairness against the use of profile evidence in policing, we have
shown that similar considerations would not defuse the charge of unfair-
ness against the use of profile evidence at the trial stage. If our argument
in Section III is correct, innocent defendants would still have a complaint
against procedures that exposed them to a higher risk of mistaken con-
viction, even if these higher risks permitted a more efficient reduction
in crime. There is also an important difference between citizens who are
affected by higher risks of mistaken stops and searches and defendants
who are affected by higher risks of mistaken convictions. Perhaps higher



objection could be recast in terms of risk, so that it ascribes individual citizens a complaint
against being exposed to higher risks of mistaken stops and searches in virtue of fitting
a certain profile. See Steven Durlauf, “Assessing Racial Profiling,” Economic Journal 116
(2001): 402–26.
     69. See Mathias Risse and Richard Zeckhauser, “Racial Profiling,” Philosophy and Public
Affairs 32 (2004): 131–70, 156–58; and David Boonin, Should Race Matter? (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2011), 341–47. See also Hellman, “Racial Profiling,” 235–36,
although she still objects to racial profiling on the grounds of the demeaning message that
it sends.
     70. See Risse and Zeckhauser, “Racial Profiling,” 158–60; Boonin, Should Race Matter?,
341–42. For reasons to doubt that innocent black Americans would be net beneficiaries of
racial profiling, see Lever, “Racial Profiling,” 433–34; and Kennedy, Race, Crime, and the
Law, 153. For an argument that even if black Americans were net beneficiaries, this would
not comprehensively justify racial profiling, see Kasper Lippert-Rasmussen, Born Free and
Equal? (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 285–301. It should also be pointed out
that the magnitude of the burdens of stops and searches is greater for blacks than for
whites. When the targeted group is subject to background injustice and stereotyping, stops
and searches are more frequently experienced as humiliating; see Paul Bou-Habib, “Racial
Profiling and Background Injustice,” Journal of Ethics 15 (2011): 33–46.
178        Ethics       January 2020
risks of mistaken stops and searches could be justified to innocent citi-
zens belonging to the profiled groups, since it may be in their overall in-
terests as citizens to accept a higher risk of mistaken stops in exchange
for a lower risk of victimization. But even if a higher risk of mistaken
conviction would be in their overall interests as innocent citizens, because
the main victims of guilty members of a profiled group were, say, other
innocent members of the same profiled group, it would not be in their
overall interests as innocent defendants, and it is to defendants that un-
equal risks of mistaken conviction must be justified.71




      71. On this, see the argument in Sec. III.C.
